Practical 4: Connect with Google Cloud DB Service and Run SQL Queries and Analyze DB

Aim:
To provision and interact with a fully managed relational database in Google Cloud (Cloud SQL for MySQL) and demonstrate basic data definition, manipulation, and analysis using SQL queries.

Procedure (Detailed Steps):

Create a Cloud SQL Instance:

Log in to your Google Cloud Console.

From the left-hand navigation menu, select SQL.

Click Create Instance and choose MySQL as the database engine.

Provide a unique Instance ID (e.g., my-project-sql-db) and set a strong root password.

Choose a region close to you (e.g., asia-south1) and select a development environment for cost-efficiency.

Click Create instance and wait for provisioning (may take several minutes).

Configure Network Access:

After creation, click the instance name to open its overview page.

Go to the Connections tab.

Under Networking, click Add a network.

Name it (e.g., My-Laptop-IP) and enter your current public IP address followed by /32 (for single-host access).

Click Save to authorize secure access.

Connect and Run Queries:

Open Google Cloud Shell (terminal icon on top-right of console).

Connect to the database:

gcloud sql connect my-project-sql-db --user=root


Enter your root password when prompted.

At the mysql> prompt, create a new database and table:

CREATE DATABASE customer_data;
USE customer_data;
CREATE TABLE customers (
  id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(255),
  city VARCHAR(255),
  join_date DATE
);


Insert some data:

INSERT INTO customers (name, city, join_date)
VALUES ('Alice', 'Mumbai', '2024-01-15'),
       ('Bob', 'Delhi', '2023-11-20');


Run queries to analyze:

SELECT * FROM customers;
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM customers;


Clean Up:

To avoid charges, delete your Cloud SQL instance:

Go back to the SQL page → select your instance → click Delete.

Result:
A fully managed Cloud SQL for MySQL instance was created and accessed securely. A database and table were created, sample data inserted, and analytical queries executed successfully.